the United States incarcerate s'more
people than any other country in the
world and with one minor exception they
incarcerate a higher percentage of their
residents than every other country by
any standard measure that economists
criminologists our sociologists look at
the u.s. is an extreme outlier and its
use of prisons I'd like to invite you to
think about what life is like for those
people living within the American prison
system if you were incarcerated there if
you lived amongst the Society of
captives how would you stay safe you
might hope that prison officials could
guarantee your safety it's certainly
their job to do so when many men and
women work very hard to do just that the
very procedures and structures of a
prison the architecture of a prison
provides some level of security the same
bars that keep you locked in your cell
at night can potentially keep other
predatory inmates out providing some
safety nevertheless across every period
of prison life that we know about we
consistently find that officials provide
only some and sometimes very little of
the safety that inmates very desperately
crave and there's two main reasons for
that the first is that even when
officials do their jobs well prisons can
be very dangerous vulnerable locations
this is a picture of a dormitory in a
state prison in California this picture
is taken during a period of substantial
overcrowding more than a hundred men
live in this room how would you feel if
you lived amongst them throughout the
day when you're using the shower getting
a haircut taking a nap you're very much
exposed to the whims to the actions to
the misdeeds and victimizations of other
inmates in an environment like this it
makes sense it seems reasonable that you
would try to find ways to make yourself
a little bit safer and a little bit more
secure the second reason why officials
don't provide all of the safety that
inmates desire is that they won't
resolve problems or regulate disputes
that arise in the underground economy
the
some of the thousands of mobile phones
confiscated from inmates in California
every single one of those phones is
prohibited it's contraband they're not
allowed to have it in addition to phones
many inmates have very strong demand for
drugs alcohol tobacco a wide range of
other goods that prison regulations
expressly prohibit so if you were
incarcerated and you wanted one of these
items maybe a phone to call a friend or
a family member in order to gain those
items you'd have to rely on the
underground economy the problem is that
be precisely because it's prohibited you
can't rely on formal procedures should
something go wrong
an inmate involved in a drug deal who
receives a bindle of heroin that's not
of the quantity or the quality that he
expected can't turn to the prison guard
and then ask him to resolve the problem
so for these two reasons in every period
of prison life that we study we
consistently find that inmates have to
provide some self-protection some
self-governance it's interesting is that
the way that inmates provide governance
actually varies dramatically depending
on the time and place the particular
prison that we look at so I want to talk
briefly about the history of the
California prison system to understand
why that is why inmates govern
themselves differently in different
times and places if you were locked up
in California prior to the 1960's your
main source of safety would be something
known as the convict could the convict
code is a set of behaviors that inmates
deemed to be acceptable and to be
honorable and the extent to which you
lived up to them you would be in good
social standing the convict code would
tell you never to inform on other
inmates not to be overly nosy in
people's personal business the code
would tell you not to gossip not to lie
not to steal it would also tell you that
if you incur death that you should pay
those debts back and then finally the
code would tell you not to be weak and
not to whine about your incarceration
experience you would be safe if you
followed this code because if you
followed this code you would have the
respect and the esteem of your peers
they would support you in situations of
conflict and that would make you much
less likely to be victimized if by
contrast you consistently violated these
norms that would cause problems it
causes conflict to law
to steal and to not pay back one's debts
to the extent that you did those things
you wouldn't have the support of the
other inmates and you'd be much more
likely to be victimized by that so in a
very decentralized process a very
bottom-up process a person's reputation
a person's individual standing would
determine whether or not he was safe or
in danger and despite being very
decentralized the system was actually
remarkably effective for many years for
many decades in California and in many
other prison settings despite its
success starting in the 1960s in the
1970s in California it began to weaken
and the code eventually began to fail
and it failed because this code only
governs effectively if people know your
reputation and you know there's the
ever-increasing size of the prison
population in California and across the
United States means that that code can't
provide the safety and the security that
you would seek it for to give some
perspective on how the inmate population
has changed this is a graph that shows
the total size of the California inmate
population from it's very beginning in
1851 up through 1921 and what this data
tells us is that the prison population
during this period is always relatively
low
there's steady growth but it's
relatively slow from 1921 to 1970 by
contrast we see a five fold increase in
the size of the prison population to an
unprecedented level it's driven by a
more rapid and sustained increase than
in any earlier period if you were in a
prison in California during this period
of increase in populations you would
recognize very clearly two distinct
trends the first trend is that more of
the people who you interacted with in
your everyday life wouldn't be known to
you they wouldn't know you and you
wouldn't know them the second trend that
you would observe is rapid increases in
inmate violence substantial increases on
assaults and on inmate stabbings during
this period that violence reflects the
fact that the code isn't resolving or
voiding problems before they occur that
violence is an indication of its failure
and while these initial increases in the
prison population did much to undermine
the code subsequent increases in the
prison population entirely smothered it
now if you'll remember the data that was
on just the last slide this graph and
this data that you're seeing right now
that's precisely the same data and what
we see is that that initial increase
that looks dramatic in its historical
context is entirely swamped by later
increases in the prison population year
after year after year consistently
California locks up at any point in time
more than a hundred thousand inmates
this is a huge prison population the
convict code worked when populations are
small cos you knew people that's not
possible
in the world of California prisons today
you can't know people and it's very
difficult for you to know them in some
sort of decentralized process so as the
code failed violence erupted people
sought alternatives inmates sought out
alternative ways to become safe and one
of the most important sources of order
in California prisons today a source
that surely if you were in prison in
California today that you would rely on
actually comes from many of those people
that we most typically associate with
violence with disorder and w'iskey with
chaos it comes from prison gangs prison
gangs are the prominent source of
governance in social and economic
activities in California prisons today
and if you were locked up from the
moment that you wake up in the morning
until the moment that you go to bed at
night they would very much influence
monitor and regulate your interactions
with every other inmate prison gangs are
inmate organizations that form behind
bars they're very active in many state
prison systems many of these groups are
also active out in the communities out
on the streets two of the most important
characteristics of prison gangs is that
membership in them is racially and
ethnically segregated such that you
can't join just any group and the second
is that when you join one of these
groups you make a lifetime commitment
typically after you leave prison you
would continue to affiliate with these
groups and in some cases to actively
follow the orders of incarcerated prison
gang leaders following the orders to
engage in criminal activity by the
incarcerated gang leaders back
the prison prison gangs govern inmate
life through a system of what an
economist or political scientist might
refer to as a community responsibility
system and it performs a similar
function as the convict code but in a
very different way it works as follows
everyone in prison has to affiliate with
some group that might be one of the
traditional prison gangs who may be a
broader racial or ethnic group or maybe
some other inmate organization but
what's crucial about these groups is
that when you're in a group all members
of that group are responsible for every
other members actions and obligations
the community is responsible for its own
members in other words and to give a
little example of how this might work if
you are a member of the group on the
left and you incurred a debt to a member
of the group on the right not only would
you be responsible for repaying it but
everyone in your group would be
responsible for that as well if you
weren't able to do so then your gang
leader or the shot-caller of your group
would meet with the rival gang leader
and they would discuss the situation
they would negotiate possible
resolutions to it some of those
resolutions are relatively reasonable
and peaceful your group may force you to
contact friends and family out on the
outside to send money in your group may
pool its resources to pay off the debt
it may be however that you have to go
and assault and enemy of that other gang
maybe an inmate they dislike or a guard
who they dislike you have to assault
them to work off the debt that you owe
them and then finally within your own
group your own group members may assault
you in a severe way to the extent that
it satisfies the rival gang leader that
it satisfies him that a message has been
sent in this way gangs provide
incredible pressure within the group in
order to facilitate social and economic
interactions between different groups
one inmate explains how the system works
referring to the gang leaders the
shot-callers he says that's why we have
shot-callers so when a couple of idiots
get into it in the yard
instead of letting them kill themselves
the shot-caller goes out and he works it
out
so these gang leaders have an incentive
to resolve problems before
they start another inmate explains if
one of my guys is messing up then we
either offer him up to the other guys
where we take him down ourselves the
very nice articulation of a brutal but
effective way that the community
responsibility system provides order in
a difficult environment so why does the
community responsibility system thrive
where the code failed the reason is
because this is an organized set of
groups these groups impose order from
the top down rather than the bottom up
these groups have sophisticated written
constitutions elaborate paperwork that
they transmit within and across prisons
and that organization is what allows
them to function highly effectively in
those large prison populations they are
the efficient producers of that
governance in large prison populations
as I mentioned gangs would play a very
important role in your life if you were
in a California prisons today they
provide order and stability they have a
reason to resolve disputes and the
motivation isn't altruism it's not
benevolence not a desire to better their
fellow man the reason why gangs resolve
disputes in prison today is because of
profits because the more orderly the
prison is the more profits they can make
in the underground economy one inmate
explains the logic he says we don't
fight in a riot and stuff unless we have
to if I'm locked down then I'm not
working you can make some serious Bank
in prison and the shot-callers hate it
when you are in lockdown right it's not
out of benevolence that they provide
governance but a desire to profit from
the underground economy I've argued that
gangs are an important source of order
and safety and if you were in prison in
California that would be true you would
experience that but that's not to say
that gangs are a good thing nobody
thinks that gang should have this
influence and power in California
prisons today gangs undermine
rehabilitation they undermine the
effective administration of the prison
and a whole host of other problems but
we need to recognize that inmates are in
a difficult and infected dangerous
situation and they have limited options
in large prison populations they've
turned to gangs
for safety the United States locks up
more people than any other country in
the world it's also the only high-income
country that has anything like the organ
is and powerful prison gangs in many of
its prison systems right these are too
potent examples of American
exceptionalism and they're not unrelated
it's not a coincidence the drive the
increase in prison growth is what
creates the foundations for the rise to
power of these prison gangs it's easy to
demonize gangs and gang members and
there's much that we should not
appreciate about them but it's a mistake
to think that they're the root of the
problem rather than a symptom of the
problem instead of demonizing them let's
instead push for smaller and safer
prisons so that inmates like yourself a
few are incarcerated in California won't
have to rely on a prison gang for
protection thank you